MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page1of11
Marking Scheme
Strictly Confidential
(For Internal and Restricted use only)
Secondary School Supplementary Examination, 2025
SUBJECT NAME: SCIENCE SUBJECT CODE (086) PAPER CODE 31/S/1
General Instructions: -
1You are aware that evaluation is the most important process in the actual and correct
assessment of the candidates. A small mistake in evaluation may lead to serious problems
which may affect the future of the candidates, education system and teaching profession. To
avoid mistakes, it is requested that before starting evaluation, you must read and understand
the spot evaluationguidelines carefully.
2“Evaluation policy is a confidential policy as it is related to the confidentiality of the
examinations conducted, Evaluation done and several other aspects. Its’ leakage to
public in any manner could lead to derailment of the examination system and affect the
life and future of millions of candidates. Sharing this policy/document to anyone,
publishing in any magazine and printing in News Paper/Website etc may invite action
under various rules of the Board and IPC.”
3Evaluation is to be done as per instructions provided in the Marking Scheme. It should not be
done according to one’s own interpretation or any other consideration. Marking Scheme should
be strictly adhered to and religiously followed.However, while evaluating, answers which
are based on latest information or knowledge and/or are innovative, they may be
assessed for their correctness otherwise and due marks be awarded to them. In class-
X, while evaluating two competency-based questions, please try to understand given
answer and even if reply is not from marking scheme but correct competency is
enumerated bythe candidate,due marks should be awarded.
4The Marking scheme carries only suggested value points for the answers.These are in the
nature of Guidelines only and do not constitute the complete answer. The students can have
their own expression and if the expression is correct, the due marks should be awarded
accordingly.
5The Head-Examiner must go through the first five answer books evaluated by each evaluator
on the first day, to ensure that evaluation has been carried out as per the instructions given in
the Marking Scheme. If there is any variation, the same should be zero after delibration and
discussion. The remaining answer books meant for evaluation shall be given only after ensuring
that there is no significant variation in the markingof individual evaluators.
6Evaluators will mark( √) wherever answer is correct. For wrong answer CROSS ‘X” be marked.
Evaluators will not put right ( ✓)while evaluating which gives an impression that answer is
correct and no marks are awarded.This is most common mistake which evaluators are
committing.
7If a question has parts, please award marks on the right-hand side for each part. Marks awarded
for different parts of the question should then be totaled up and written in the left-hand margin
and encircled. This maybe followed strictly.
8If a question does not have any parts, marks must be awarded in the left-hand margin and
encircled. This mayalso be followed strictly.
9If a student has attempted an extra question, answer of the question deserving more marks
should be retained and the other answer scored out with a note“Extra Question”.
10No marks to be deducted for the cumulative effect of an error. It should be penalized onlyonce.
11A full scale of marks _____80_____(example 0 to 80/70/60/50/40/30 marks as given in
Question Paper) has to be used. Please do not hesitate to award full marks if the answer
deserves it.
MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page2of11
12Every examiner has to necessarily do evaluation work for full working hours i.e., 8 hours every
day and evaluate 20 answer books per day in main subjects and 25 answer books per day in
other subjects(Details aregiven in Spot Guidelines).
13Ensure that you do not make the following common types of errors committed by the Examiner
in the past:- Giving more marks for an answer than assigned to it.
●Wrong totaling of marks awarded on an answer.
●Wrong transfer of marks from the inside pages of the answer book to the title page.
Wrong question wise totaling on the title page.
●Leaving answer or part thereof unassessed in an answer book.
●
●Wrong totaling of marks of the two columns on the title page.
●Wrong grand total.
●Marks in words and figures not tallying/not same.
●Wrong transfer of marks from the answer book to online award list.
●Answers marked as correct, but marks not awarded. (Ensure that the right tick mark is
correctly and clearly indicated. It should merely be a line. Same is with the X for incorrect
answer.)
●Half or a part of answer marked correct and the rest as wrong, but no marks awarded.
14While evaluating the answer books if the answer is found to be totally incorrect, it should be
marked as cross(X)and awarded zero(0)Marks.
15Any un assessed portion, non-carrying over of marks to the title page, or totaling error detected
by the candidate shall damage the prestige of all the personnel engaged in the evaluation work
as also of the Board. Hence, in order to uphold the prestige of all concerned, it is again
reiterated that the instructions be followed meticulouslyandjudiciously.
16The Examiners should acquaint themselves with the guidelines given in the “Guidelines for
spot Evaluation” before startingthe actual evaluation.
17Every Examiner shall also ensure that all the answers are evaluated, marks carried over to the
titlepage,correctlytotaled and written in figures and words.
18The candidates are entitled to obtain photocopy of the Answer Book on request on payment of
the prescribed processing fee. All Examiners/Additional Head Examiners/Head Examiners are
once again reminded that they must ensure that evaluation is carried out strictly as per value
points for each answer asgiven in the MarkingScheme.
MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page3of11
SECONDARY SCHOOL SUPPLEMENTARY EXAMINATION, JULY 2025
MARKING SCHEME
CLASS: X SCIENCE (Subject Code–086)
[ Paper Code: 31/S/1]
Maximum Marks: 80
Q.
No.
EXPECTED ANSWER / VALUE POINTS Mark
s
Tot
al
Ma
rks
SECTION A
1(B) / Burning of carbon (coal) 1 1
2(A) / (i) and (ii) 1 1
3(C) /Silver & Gold 1 1
4(C)/ Most vigorous reaction with magnesium and no reaction with
copper.
1 1
5(B)/ 3 1 1
6(C)/ (i) and (iv) 1 1
7(B) / Pons 1 1
8(B)/ Wilting of leaves 1 1
9(B)/ Pollen grains 1 1
10(B) /50% violet, 50% white 1 1
11(B)/–10 cm 1 1
12(A)/ Plane mirror 1 1
13(A)/ Temperature 1 1
14(D)/ uniform throughout its length 1 1
15(D)/ Snake 1 1
16(B) /Packaging of materials have resulted in lesser amount of non-
biodegradable waste.
1 1
17(B)/ Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true but Reason
(R) is not the correct explanation of Assertion (A).
1 1
18(B)/ Both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) are true but Reason
(R) is not the correct explanation of Assertion (A).
1 1
19(D)/ Assertion (A) is false, but Reason (R) is true. 1 1
20(C)/Assertion (A) is true, but Reason (R) is false. 1 1
SECTION–B
21 (a) 2Al (s) + 3CuCl 2 (aq)→2AlCl 3 (aq) + 3Cu(s)
(b) Zn(s) + 2NaOH(aq)→Na 2ZnO2 (aq) +H2(g)
1
1 2
22(a)(i) Homogenous mixture of two or more metals / homogenous
mixture of a metal & a non-metal
1
MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page4of11
(ii)
•Composition of solder : lead and tin / Pb and Sn
•low melting point.
OR
(b) (i)
cathode–thin wire/strip of pure silver
anode–impure silver
(ii)
•Insoluble impurities settled down at the bottom of the anode
•As it is impurities produced during electrolytic refining of
metal at the bottom of anode.
½
½
½
½
½
½ 2
23(a) So that there is sufficient time for oxygen to be absorbed and
for the carbon dioxide to be released.
(b) Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water than oxygen is, hence
is mostly transported in dissolved form in our blood.
1
1
2
24(a)Tendrils are sensitive to touch. When they come in contact with
any support, the part of tendril in contact with the object does not
grow as rapidly as the part of tendril away from the object. This
causes the tendril to circle around the object and thus cling to it.
OR
(b)
•Electrical impulses reach only those cells that are connected by
nervous tissue / not each and every cell in animal body is
connected by nervous tissue.
•Once an electrical impulse is generated in a cell and transmitted,
the cell takes some time to reset its mechanism to generate a new
impulse.
2
1
1 2
25u =–25 cm
f =–15 cm
v = ?
f
1
u
1
v
1 = +
15
1
25
1
v
1− =−
25
1
15
1
v
1 +−=
=
75
3 5+−=
−
75
=−= 2
5 7v –37.5 cm ( Image is formed 37.5 cm in front of the
mirror.)
½
½
1
2
MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page5of11
26
•Ray diagram
•Labelling∠i and∠D
1
½+½
2
SECTION–C
27(a)
•Baking soda / sodium hydrogen carbonate
•NaHCO 3
NaCl + H 2O + CO 2 + NH3 →NH 4Cl + NaHCO 3
(b) Being alkaline or basic in nature, it neutralises excess acid in the
stomach & provides relief.
½
½
1
1
3
28 •A reaction in which a more reactive element displaces a less
reactive element from its compound.
•Thermit reaction
•Reaction of Iron (III) oxide with aluminium is a highly
exothermic reaction, producing iron in molten form which is
used to join railway tracks:
1
1
1
3
29(a)
•Yeast cells
Ethanol , Carbon dioxide , Energy
•Muscle cells
Lactic acid , Energy
(b) Cytoplasm
½×3
½+½
½
3
30(a)
•The translocation of food and other substances takes place in
the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells.

MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page6of11
•Material like sucrose is transferred into phloem tissue using
energy from ATP.
•This increases osmotic pressure of the tissue causing water to
move into it that moves material in the phloem to tissue which
have less pressure.
OR
Xylem Phloem
Direction of
transportation
Unidirectional/
upwards only
Bidirectional/ both
upwards and
downwards
Major driving force Transpiration pull
or (Root pressure)
Osmotic pressure
Nature of the
substances
transported
Water and
dissolved minerals
Products of
photosynthesis/
amino acid, sucrose
1×3
1×3
3
31 (a)
1
Req =
1
 +
1
3 +
1
6
Req = 1Ω
(b)
1
 =
1
3 +
1
6 =
1

Rp = 2Ω
Req = 2Ω+2Ω= 4Ω
1
½
1
½ 3
32 (a) According to this rule, stretch the thumb, forefinger and middle
finger of your left hand such that they are mutually perpendicular. If
the first finger points in the direction of magnetic field and the second
finger in the direction of current, then the thumb will point in the
direction of motion or the force acting on the conductor.
(b) (i) Rod is displaced towards left.
(ii) Rod is displaced towards right.
(iii)
•No displacement is observed in rod.
•This is because current and magnetic field are parallel, so
1
½
½
½

MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page7of11
there will be no force experienced by the conductor. ½ 3
33(a)Progressive accumulation of harmful chemicals (pesticides /
DDT / nonbiodegradable chemicals) at each trophic level as
we go higher in the food chain.
(b)
•Human /Fourth trophic level
•As human beings occupy the top level in the food chain, the
maximum concentration of nonbiodegradable (harmful)
chemicals get accumulated in human bodies.
1
1
1
3
SECTION–D
34(a)
•Chlor alkali process
•When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of
sodium chloride called brine, it decomposes to form sodium
hydroxide and chlorine.
•Chlorine gas produced at anode
Hydrogen gas produced at cathode.
Compound C–Bleaching Powder
(Any one reaction)
OR
(b)
(i) water of crystallisation/ water molecules present in crystal of
ferrous sulphate
(ii) greenish to white to brown /greenish to white/ greenish to brown
(iii)
(iv) 7
(v) (I) CuSO 4.5H2O
(II) Na2CO3.10H2O
½
½
½ + ½
½+ ½
1
1
1
1
1
1
½
½
5
35 (a) (i)
•The ability of eye lens to adjust its focal length.
•Image distance remains the same.
1
1

MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page8of11
•Ciliary muscles
•Ciliary muscles modify the curvature of eye lens / change
the focal length of eye lens.
(ii)
•Myopia / near-sightedness
•Causes - (i) excessive curvature of eye lens
(ii) elongation of eyeball.
•Concave lens of suitable power.
OR
(b) (i)
•Tyndall effect / Scattering of light
•When a beam of light strikes fine particles in a smoke or dust
filled room, light gets scattered by these particles and reaches
us, this makes the path of light visible.
•Very fine particles scatter mainly blue light while particles of
larger size scatter light of longer wavelength. If the size of
scattering particles is large enough, then the scattered light
may even appear white.
(ii) Lens of power -0.5 D will be used for the correction of his
distant vision.
P =
1

-0.5 D =
1

f =
1
−0.5 = -2 m
½
½
½
½+½
½
1
1
1
1
1 5
36(a)
(i) DNA/Deoxyribonucleic acid/ gene
(ii) Amoeba - Splitting of the two cells during division (binary
fission) can take place in any plane.
Leishmania -Binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in
relation to whip like structure at one end.
/
1
1
1
MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page9of11
(iii) Because most multicellular organisms are not simply random
collection of cells. They have specialised cells which are organised as
tissues and tissues as organs which have been placed at definite
position in the body.
OR
(b) (i)
•Placenta is a disc like special tissue which is embedded in the
uterine wall.
•It contains villi on embryo’s side. On the mother’s side are
blood spaces which surround the villi.
•The embryo getsnourishment from the mother’s blood
through placenta / the waste generated by embryo is removed
by transferring it to mother’sblood through placenta
(ii)
•mechanical barrier e.g. condoms
•chemical methods / hormonal methods eg: Oral pills
•contraceptive devices eg : Loop / Copper–T
•Surgical methods: eg: to block vas deferens in male / fallopian
tube in females is blocked.
(Any three)
2
1
½
½
½×6 5
SECTION–E
37 (a) Propyne
(b) Saturated carbon compounds produce blue / clean flame.
Unsaturated compounds produce yellow / sooty flame.
(c) (i)Unsaturated hydrocarbons undergo addition reactions
1
½
½
1

MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page10of11
Example
( or any other example)
OR
(c) (ii) Compounds with identical molecular formula but different
structural formula or structures are called structural isomers .
1
1
½ +½
4
38(a) The chromosome pair which is responsible for determination of
sex in humans are called sex chromosomes.
(b) Few reptiles / Lizards- temperature is responsible for sex
determination.
/
Snails - Sex determination depends on environmental factors.
(Or any other example )
(c) (i) No.
A new born inherits X chromosome from mother. The sex of the
child is determined by what they inherit from their father. A child
who inherits X chromosome from father will be a girl (XX) and one
who inherits a Y chromosome from him will be a boy (XY).
OR
(c) (ii) It is ensured through sexual reproduction where both male and
female parents produce gametes through meiosis. Meiosis reduces the
chromosome number to half. So, each gamete carries half of the
parents’ genetic material. During fertilisation, male gamete fuses with
female gamete and restores complete genetic material in progeny.
Thus, equal genetic contribution of both parent is ensured.
1
½+½
1
1
2 4
39(a) (i) Ceiling fan and bulb‘L’will draw current and work.
(ii) All the devices in the circuit draw current and work.
(b) P= VI
20 W = 220 V × I
0
0 = I
I =
1
11 A= 0.09 A
½
½
1

MS_X_Science_086_31/S/1 Page11of11
(c) (i)
•P =
2

R =
44×44
10 = 193.6Ω
•Totalresistance = 5 × 193.6Ω= 968Ω
OR
(c) (ii)
•The bulb L will stop glowing and other bulbs in the circuit
will continue to glow with same brightness.
•The fuse F 1 melts and breaks the circuit for bulb L.
The circuit remains complete for other bulbs connected in
parallel to bulb L
1
1
1
1
4
*******************